(Note:
All text in RED in this template is for instruction purpose only.
Delete this info in final report
Use font TIMES NEW ROMAN for the entire report.
Page layout – A4 size, normal margin, 1.5 line spacing.
Chapter headings - use 16 font size, bold, Centre alignment, each chapter should begin on new page.
Section headings – use 14 font size, bold, Left alignment
Sub-section headings- use 12 font size, bold, Left alignment
Section and Sub-section body – use 12 font size, Justification alignment, Text should be in black colour.
The page number should be in footer at middle.
The page number of the Acknowledgement, Abstract, List of Tables, List of Contents, must be in Roman numerals (e.g. i, ii, iii, …….).
All other pages must be assigned number (1, 2, 3, 4, …….) starting from 1. However, a page number should not appear on the title page.
In the Table of Contents, four levels of heading can be used, inclusive of the chapter titles. There can be two subheadings within a level of heading.
Do not use AI tools like ChatGPT, Gemini, etc. for content, as AI tools often collate text from various sources and lead to high level of plagiarism. Overall similarity should be below 20% and single-source similarity below 3%.
The references must be arranged in the order of their appearance. Each entry of the reference must be referred to at least once in the body of the thesis by using a format as mentioned in Harvard referencing and citation style.
Refer Reference section for detailed instruction on references
Every Figure must have the figure number, caption and centre aligned at bottom of the figure e.g. Figure 1.3, Figure 2.5, etc. The number 1 and 2 before decimal represents chapter number in which the figure belongs, while the number 3 and 5 after decimal indicates their order of figure within the chapter.
Every Table must have the table number, caption is centre aligned at the top of the table
e.g. Table 1.2, Table 3.4, etc. The number 1 and 3 before decimal represents chapter number in which the table belongs, while the number 2 and 4 after decimal indicates their order of table within the chapter.
Every Figure and Table must be in-text cited in the body of sections or sub-section
The appendixes should be used to contain lengthy or detailed supplementary documentation that may not be appropriate if inserted in the body of the thesis. Examples are data sheets of components, diagrams, models, sample documents, data dictionary, systems structured charts, program listing, user’s manuals, system’s manuals, and glossary of terms.
Open source tools like Draw.io, Dia, etc. can be used to draw the block diagram, flowchart, domain model, etc.

RUBRICS for Project work

Criteria
Excellent
Good
Satisfactory
Unsatisfactory
Abstract &
Abstract is a concise,
Abstract and
Abstract or
Abstract and
Introduction
powerful summary.
introduction are clear
introduction may be
introduction are

Introduction defines the
and functional. The
vague. Problem and
missing or illogical.

problem and objectives
problem and
objectives are present
The report’s purpose

clearly, providing strong
objectives are well-
but lack specificity.
is unclear.

motivation and context.
stated.


Literature
Comprehensive and
Covers relevant
Includes some
Absent, irrelevant, or
Review
critical analysis of
sources and provides
relevant sources but
a simple list of

existing literature. Gaps
a good overview.
may be superficial.
summaries without

are identified and
Connection to the
The connection to the
critical engagement.

justified. The project is
project is clear.
project is weak.


effectively positioned




within the field.



Methodology
Described with
Described clearly and
Explained, but some
Missing or poorly
And
exceptional clarity,
accurately; the project
details are missing or
described, providing
Project
allowing for full
could likely be
unclear, making it
insufficient detail to
Management
reproducibility. Strong,
replicated. A logical
difficult to fully
understand the

well-reasoned
justification for the
replicate the work.
project's execution.

justification for the
methods is provided.



chosen approach, tools,




and materials.




The project plan is
The project
Provides a simple
Lacks any discussion

detailed and realistic,
management
timeline without a
of project

demonstrating
approach is logical
deeper reflection on
management, or the

exceptional foresight in
and well-documented.
constraints or
project was clearly

managing scope, time,
The report shows that
challenges faced.
unmanaged.

and resources. Includes a
the project was



thoughtful reflection on
executed efficiently.



challenges and lessons




learned.



Analysis and
Design choices are
The design is logical
Design is functional,
Design is flawed or
Design
innovative, thoroughly
and effective, with a
but reasoning is not
non-existent. No

justified, and directly
clear rationale for the
well-articulated.
justification for the

address requirements.
choices made.
Limited or no
design or a poor

Robust analysis of
Analysis of
discussion of
understanding of

alternatives and well-
alternatives is present
alternative
design principles.

documented decisions.
and sound.
approaches.

Implementation
Meticulous and well-
The implementation is
Implementation
Implementation is

structured account of
clearly documented
section is present, but
not described, or the

hardware and software
and functional.
details are sparse or
documentation is

implementation. Code is
Adequate detail on
confusing. The
inaccurate and

well-commented, and
the software and
hardware or software
cannot be used to

schematics are clear. The
hardware components
is not fully described.
replicate the project.

implementation is robust
is provided.



and functional.




Evaluation and Results
Results are presented with impeccable clarity. The evaluation is rigorous and unbiased, with insightful analysis that directly addresses objectives.
Results are presented clearly and accurately. The evaluation is sound and addresses most objectives.
Results are presented but may be difficult to interpret due to poor organization. The analysis is basic and lacks depth.
Results are presented without evaluation or are illogical. The data is incomplete, inaccurate, or uninterpretable.
Social, Legal, Ethical, & Sustainability
Includes a comprehensive and insightful discussion of the project's broader implications. Potential risks are identified and mitigated. Demonstrates a strong sense of responsibility.
Includes a well- considered section on the broader impact of the project. Key considerations are discussed.
Includes a superficial or generic mention of social and ethical issues, without a deep analysis.
Completely ignores the social, legal, ethical, and sustainability dimensions of the project.
Conclusion
Provides a concise and
Accurately
A simple restatement of
Missing, inaccurate, or

powerful summary of
summarizes the
the results. May fail to
unrelated to the rest of

key findings, answering
main findings and
answer research
the report. No

all research questions. It
addresses the
questions or discuss
recommendations for

discusses the project's
research questions.
implications.
future work are

significance and
Discusses the
Recommendations are
provided.

limitations, and provides
project’s
vague.


specific
significance and



recommendations for
offers a few



future research.
suggestions for




future work.


References
All sources are
References are
Several errors in the
References are

meticulously cited using
mostly correct and
reference list or
missing, incomplete,

a consistent and correct
follow a consistent
citations. The style is
or incorrectly

academic style. The
style, with only
not consistently
formatted.

bibliography is
minor errors. The
followed.


comprehensive and
bibliography is



includes all references
complete.



mentioned.



Organization
Flawlessly organized
Well-organized with
Organization is
Lacks a logical
& Writing
with a logical flow. All
a logical structure.
acceptable but could be
structure, making it

sections are clearly
Headings and
improved. Some
confusing. Writing is

labeled, transitions are
subheadings are
sections may feel out of
difficult to understand

smooth, and the writing
used effectively.
place. Writing contains
due to numerous

is clear, concise, and free
Writing is generally
several errors that may
errors in grammar and

of grammatical errors.
clear and
distract the reader.
sentence structure.


professional, with




only minor errors.




School of Information Science
Department of Master of Computer Applications


<TITLE>
Declaration:
This report template is intended for guidance purposes only and is not an official document.
Also, the examples provided are compiled from
multiple sources solely for the purpose of illustration and do not constitute a single problem.
By
<Student name, id>




Supervisor
<Name>

<Month Year>





Department of Master of Computer Applications

BONAFIDE CERTIFICATE

Certified that this project titled “TITLE OF THE REPORT” is a bonafide work of “NAME (ROLL NO)”, who have successfully carried out the project work and submitted the report for partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award of the degree of Master of Computer Applications during 2025-26.








Guide Name Project Guide Master of Computer Applications
Presidency University
Dr. M Renuga Devi
HOD
Master of Computer Applications
Presidency University
Dr. R Mahalakshmi
Associate Dean School of Information Science
Presidency University






Examiners

Sl. no.
Name
Signature
Date
1



2




DECLARATION

We the students of first year Master of Computer Applications at Presidency University, Bengaluru, named <Project member names without USN>, hereby declare that the major project titled “<PROJECT TITLE>” has been independently carried out by us and submitted in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree of Master of Computer Applications during the academic year of 2025-26. Further, the matter embodied in the project has not been submitted previously by anybody for the award of any Degree or Diploma to any other institution.


<Student Name 1>
USN:
XXXXXXXX
<Signature 1>



PLACE: BENGALURU DATE: DD-MM-YYYY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

For completing this project work, We/I have received the support and the guidance from many people whom I would like to mention with deep sense of gratitude and indebtedness. We extend our gratitude to our beloved Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Pro-Vice Chancellor, and Registrar for their support and encouragement in completion of the project.
I would like to sincerely thank my internal guide Dr./Mr. Name of guide, Designation, Master of Computer Applications, Presidency University, for his/her moral support, motivation, timely guidance and encouragement provided to us during the period of our project work.
I am also thankful to Dr. M. Renuga Devi, Professor, Head of the Department of Master of Computer Applications, School of Information Science, Presidency University, for her mentorship and encouragement.
We express our cordial thanks to Dr. R Mahalakshmi, Associate Dean (School of Information Science), School of Computer Science Engineering and Information Science of Presidency University for providing the required facilities and intellectually stimulating environment that aided in the completion of my project work.
We are grateful to Section Coordinator name, Project Coordinators, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, for facilitating research activities and timely assessments.

We are also grateful to Teaching and Non-Teaching staff of Department of Master of Computer Applications and also staff from other departments who have extended their valuable help and cooperation.
<STUDENT NAME 1 >

Abstract

(The Abstract
Should be about maximum a page,
First few sentences briefly describe the background of the project,
Next few sentences the concept or approach used in the project, and
The last few sentences summarises the results)

Table of Content


Sl. No.
Title
Page No.

Declaration


Acknowledgement


Abstract


List of Figures


List of Tables


Abbreviations

1.
Introduction
Background
Problem Statement and Motivation
Existing Systems and Technologies
Proposed approach
Objectives of the Project
SDGs
Overview of project report

2.
Literature review

3.
Methodology

4.
Project management
Project timeline
Risk analysis
Project budget

5.
System Analysis and Design
Requirements
Use Case Diagrams
Data Flow Diagrams (DFD)
System Architecture / Block Diagram
Database Design (ER Diagram, Schema)
User Interface Design
Technology Stack and Standards Followed


6.
Implementation and Simulation
Hardware / Software Requirements
Development Tools and Frameworks Used
Implementation Details (Modules and Functions)
Simulation and Testing Environment

7.
Evaluation and Results
Test Plan and Test Cases
Test Results and Analysis
Performance Evaluation
Discussion of Results / Insights

8.
Social, Legal, Ethical, Sustainability and Safety Aspects
Social aspects
Legal aspects
Ethical aspects
Sustainability aspects
Safety aspects

9.
Conclusion and Future Work


References


Appendix


List of Figures
(include list of all figure and page no e.g.
Figure no.
Caption
Page no
1.1
Sustainable development goals
12
3.1
The V model methodology
14
3.2
Another example of the V model methodology
14
…..




List of Tables

(include list of
all tables and page no

e.g.


Table no.
Caption
Page no.
2.1
Summary of Literature reviews
15
4.1
Project planning timeline
20
4.2
Project implementation timeline
20
…….



List of Abbreviations
(include all abbreviations used in report in alphabetic order) e.g.
IoTInternet of Things
SDGSustainable Development Goal
….





(The Introduction should describe
Chapter 1
Introduction

The background of the project,
Aim of project,
The need of the project and the statistics, and
The of prior existing technologies)

Background
Describe the background of the project and
ensure proper citation and referencing the source.
Statistics
Describe the statistics (preferably the regional) and the need of the project and
ensure proper citation and referencing the source.
Prior existing technologies
Describe the prior existing technologies of the project and
ensure proper citation and referencing the source.
Proposed approach
Aim of project
Motivation
Proposed approach
Applications of the project
Limitation of the proposed approach

Objectives
(The objectives should be 3 to 5.
Do not list benefits or applications as objectives.
Objectives should encompass various aspects listed below (but not limited to) of the project and
Behaviour -
Analysis -
System management –
Security –
Deployment -
should be demonstrable in the project.) e.g.

E.g. Interfacing light and temperature sensor to microcontroller to monitor ambient light and temperature in range of 100C to 600C)


SDGs
Align the project objectives with UN SDGs as illustrated in Fig 1.1.
assess how your project aligns with some UN SDGs and
ensure proper citation and referencing

Fig 1.1 Sustainable development goals [1]
Overview of project report
(gives an Overview of the report should be in a single paragraph summarising all chapters. e.g.
Chapter 1 provides an introduction on the project topic which is…Chapter 2 discusses the literature reviews …, Chapter 3 describes the methodology …. Chapter 4 covers the required project budgeting…, Chapter 8, entitled ‘ABC’, discusses the …)

Chapter 2
Literature review
(Summarise in own word the context at least ten literature taken from conference or journal papers.
Note: Do not summarise from websites, wikipedia, blogs, etc.
Summarising includes understanding the context (like the concept/approach used in literature, the results obtained, the future work and recommendations) and write review in own words without use of AI tools. May also include illustrations from literature wherever essential / necessary.
Discuss the concepts, approach, methods, analysis, and issues adapted in the project.
Identify the limitations, inconsistencies, gaps, contradictions, differences.
Suggest improvements.
(do not include detailed description, images, tables, data, illustration, results, graphs, etc. from the literature unless all that information is used as basis for your project)
(do not use AI tools like ChatGPT, Gemini, etc. to summarise as AI tools often collate text from various sources and lead to high level of
plagiarism.)
The key points should also be presented in a table.
each as a single paragraph of about half page
Ensure proper citation and referencing)
e.g.
NarasimhaRao et al. implemented an IOT weather forecasting system that measures various parameters such as temperature, humidity, and rainfall and air pollution comparing with the traditional weather forecasting system. The Iot weather forecasting gives continuous and real time data. The information from the sensors is sent to the cloud server. To make sure that there is no external harm for the data, the data security in cloud provides with encryption and decryption of data while retrieving the information from cloud. This reduces corruption of data, minimizes communication overhead, enhances the security and also helps to give wise predictions. The work uses the traditional database system management is replaced by cloud, cloud has comparatively less maintenance cost, data storage cost and it increases the scalability. It provide enhanced security a homomorphic encryption technique is used, this provides a safer communication between the cloud and user. The homomorphic technique has many advantages compared to the present security systems [2].
Raju and Laxmi examine the use of supervised machine learning algorithm and short-term load forecasting for iot based online load forecasting. The data obtained from a research lab is used for training ML algorithms to short term load forecasting. Online forecasting is considered more effective as it uses recent data for forecasting and training. Different regression algorithms are implemented on cloud for forecasting power consumption. The effectiveness of ML algorithms is known by calculating the performance parameters such as RMSE, MSE and so on. The methodology presented in this paper offers real time prediction of the power

consumption due to this its very much preferred in IOT based online home energy management system [3].


2.1 Summary of Literatures reviewed
e.g. summarise the literatures
Table 2.1 Summary of Literature reviews


Chapter 3
Methodology
(Identify a suitable methodology for the project, like V-model, Spiral, Devops, Onion, SDLC, Waterfall, Agile, Scrum, etc. illustrated below
Describe the stages of the project by mapping to the stages of methodology viz. requirements (specification, literature), system design, functional design, unit design (hardware, software, cloud), unit testing, integration testing, Verification, Validation, etc.)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.
Ensure proper citation and referencing.


Figure 3.1 The V model methodology [4]

Figure 3.2 Another example of the V model methodology [5]

Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2 shows the V-model methodology. The verification stage includes phases …., whereas the validation phase includes ….
Figure 3.3 illustrates the W- model methodology. Each phase of the W-model has a corresponding test requirements and testing phase…..
Note:
Every Fig must be captioned below the figure.
Every figure must be described along with in-text citation in body of sections as shown above paragraphs.
Also it should be added to the list of figures section
Ensure proper citation and referencing for figures taken from sources.


Figure 3.3 The W model methodology [6]

Figure 3.4 The Devops methodology [7]



(a)


(b)
Figure 3.5 (a) Onion methodology, (b) another example [8]



Figure 3.6 SDLC phases [9]


Figure 3.7 Summary of various methodology [10]





Figure 3.8 Some more methodologies [11]





Figure 3.9 Summary of project breakdown to task [12]




Project timeline
Chapter 4
Project Management

(Show a tabular visual representation of project breakdown, project's schedule, outlining tasks, milestones, and deadlines in chronological order)
Also called Gantt chart is a visual, bar-chart-based project management tool that displays tasks, their duration, start and end dates, dependencies, and milestones along a timeline. It provides a clear overview of a project's schedule and progress, allowing teams to track work, identify potential bottlenecks, and ensure alignment on project goals.
What a Gantt Chart Shows
Tasks: A vertical list of all the activities required to complete a project.
Timeline: A horizontal axis that represents time, showing the duration of the project.
Bars (Gantt Bars): Horizontal bars on the timeline, with their length indicating a task's duration and position showing its start and end dates.
Dependencies: Lines or arrows connecting tasks to show which tasks must be completed before others can begin.
Milestones: Important points or due dates in the project, often marked by a diamond or star symbol.
Progress: The bars can be shaded or filled to show the percentage of a task that has been completed.
Assignees: The person or team responsible for each task can be shown on the chart.
How It's Used
Planning: Helps in breaking down a project into manageable tasks and scheduling them in a logical sequence.
Scheduling: Creates a visual roadmap of the project timeline, allowing for better time management.
Tracking Progress: Provides a quick, at-a-glance view of project status and task completion.
Resource Management: Allows teams to assign tasks and see workloads.
Communication: Offers a clear, shared view of the project for all team members and stakeholders, ensuring everyone is aligned.
To prepare Gantt chart Use open source tools GanttProject or Google Sheets. It can also be prepared using MS Excel, or MS Project that may require license.






Project Planning

Table 4.1 summarises the timeline during the project planning phase. The milestones are identified and the deadlines are ……
Table 4.2 summarises the timeline during the project implementation phase……
Note:
Every Table must be captioned above the table
Every table must be described along with in-text citation in body of sections as shown above paragraph.
Also it should be added to the list of tables section
Ensure proper citation and referencing for Tables taken from sources.)
Table 4.1 Project planning timeline



(Describe the project timeline and describe the suitability for the project)

Project implementation
Table 4.2 Project implementation timeline

(Describe the project timeline and describe the suitability for the project)

Risk analysis

(PESTLE analysis - assess how these factors might impact a project's success and allows for proactive risk mitigation and opportunity maximization)

Table 4.3 Example of PESTEL analysis [13]

Table 4.4 Another example of PESTEL analysis [14]

Table 4.5 Example of Project phase risk matrix [15]

(Describe the risk these factors might impact a project's success and the appropriate risk mitigation for the project)

Project budget
Step 1: List All Tasks and Resource Requirements Step 2: Check Team Availability
Step 3: Estimate Task Duration
Step 4: Use Your Experience and Data

Step 5: Set the Project Budget
Step 6: Keep Track of the Project Budget and Assess the Team Sample Template for project budget is shown in Table 4.6
Table 4.6 Example of project budget [16]


Chapter 5
Analysis and Design
(Analysis and design are distinct but interconnected phases in a systems development. Analysis focuses on understanding the problem and gathering requirements, while design focuses on creating a solution based on those requirements. Essentially, analysis identifies "what" a system needs to do, and design determines "how" it will be done.
Design is the process of creating a plan, concept, or sketch for an object, system, or process with a specific purpose or function. It involves conceiving, structuring, computing values to derive the appropriate components, and arranging elements to meet a particular need or goal, often incorporating both functional and aesthetic considerations. The term can also refer to the resulting blueprint, pattern, or the inherent arrangement of an object's components.
Analysis is the detailed, organized examination of a complex topic, substance, or situation by breaking it down into its smaller, constituent parts to understand its nature, essential features, or underlying causes. It involves carefully studying the pieces to gain deeper insight into the whole, often to make a decision, draw conclusions, or solve a problem.
Ensure proper citation and referencing)
Requirements
the requirements of the system.
In this step, the system purpose, behaviour and requirements are captured. Requirements can be:
System HW Requirement Phase
Identify Initial conditions
Determine Input parameters
System outcomes
Formulate relations
Identify system constraints
System SW Requirement Phase
Identify Initial conditions
Determine Input parameters
System outcomes
Formulate relations
Identify system constraints
Data collection requirements
Data analysis requirements
System management requirements
Security requirements
User interface requirements

e.g. For home automation system the purpose and requirements specification is in Table 5.1 as follows:

Table 5.1 Summarizing requirements

Purpose
A home automation system that allows controlling the lights remotely using a web application


Behaviour
Home automation system should support two modes: auto and manual
Auto: System measures the light level in the room and switches on the light when it is dark
Manual: Allows remotely switching lights on and off
System
Management
System should provide remote monitoring and control functions
Data Analysis
System should perform local analysis of the data
Application Deployment
Application should be deployed locally, but should be accessible remotely
Security
Should provide basic security like user authentication

System HW design phase
Determine functional blocks
Develop process flow
Identify inconsistencies
Design interfaces
System design and analysis
Developing an integrated test plan
System SW design phase
Determine functional blocks
Develop process flow
Identify inconsistencies
Design interfaces
System design and analysis
developing an integrated test plan

Block diagram
(The functional block diagram.
Show inputs blocks on the left, the processor in middle, the output block to the right. Show relation between blocks with appropriate direction arrows.
Blocks should be the functions and not names of components.
Circuit diagram is not block diagram)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.

e.g.

Figure 5.1 Functional block diagram (Describe the block diagram and describe the suitability for the project)
Figure 5.1 shows the functional block diagram of the system. It consist of ……
System Flow chart
(The system flow chart
Visualise the process flow of initialisation, inputs, processing, conditions, and outputs)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw flow diagrams.
e.g.

Figure 5.2 System flow chart (Describe the flowchart and describe the suitability for the project)
Figure 5.2 shows the system flow chart. The flow begins with initialisation……

Functional HW unit design phase
Identify HW components
HW Component datasheets
Compare components
Unit design and analysis
Develop a unit Test plan
Functional SW unit design phase
Identify SW components
HW Component datasheets
Unit design and analysis
Develop a unit Test plan
Choosing devices
(viz. microcontroller, sensor, actuators)
(Instructions
Search for multiple models of each type of device in columns
Summarize from DATASHEETS the feature in rows.
Add rows to include additional features/specifications not listed in table.
Leave table cells blank wherever data is not available
Below each table include the references for every datasheet referred along with the URL.)

Choosing Processor
(While choosing the IoT device/Processor for the IoT application,
Summarize (as table below) the specifications (like digital ports, analog port, Serial port, I2C, UART, etc) of various IoT devices referring to the DATASHEETS and
Then choose the device that has the all necessary features for the project
Ensure proper citation and referencing.)
(Example look for various processors (Arduino, Raspberry Pi, ESP32, etc.) and compare the specifications)
Table 5.2 Comparing features of different processors

Features/ Specification
Arduino
Raspberry Pi
NodeMCU
ESP32 dev kit

Power Supply
5V




Number of Digital I/O ports
14




Voltage and
Current rating for digital port
5V
20mA




Number of Analog ports
6




Voltage range of analog port
0 – 5V





Number of Serial ports
1




I2C
1




SPI
1




UART
1




PWM
6




RAM
2KB SRAM,
32KB
FLASH, 1KB EEPROM




Timers/ Counters
2x 8-bit Timer/Counter 1x 16-bit
Timer/Counter




Bluetooth
No




Wireless
No




Other features


















References (include in the reference section at the end)
Arduino, Arduino UNO3, https://docs.arduino.cc/hardware/uno-rev3/#tech-specs


Choosing devices (Sensors, driver circuits, Actuators)
For every device required in the project, while choosing the devices (Sensors, driver circuits, Actuators, etc) that are connected to the IoT devices,
Summarize (as table below) the specifications (like working principle, output type, voltage range, sensitivity, etc) of various devices referring to the DATASHEETS and
Then choose the device that meet the IoT device.
Ensure proper citation and referencing of datasheets.
(Example look for various temperature sensor (LM35, DHT11, etc) and compare the specifications)

Temperature sensor

Table 5.3 Comparing features of different temperature sensors

Features/ Specification
LM35
DHT11
Thermistor
Thermocouple
Describe Working principle (state the relation between O/P to
I/P)
Detects temperature and convert to proportional
voltage



Sensitivity (change in O/P for unit change in I/P)
10mV / 0C



Resolution (smallest value that can be
measured)
10mV



Accuracy (how closely
measured value matches the true or expected value of the quantity
being measured.)
±0.5°C at 25°C



Linearity (O/P signal
reflects a linear
relationship with the I/P)
Non-Linearity Only ±¼°C Typical



Range
(the minimum and maximum values that it can accurately
measure)
-55 0C to 150 0C



Output Type
(analog, digital, Serial, etc)
Analog



Power Supply
4 V to 30 V



Power consumption
60 μA



Drift
(gradual change in O/P over time,
even when the I/P remains constant)
















References (include in the reference section at the end)
Ti, LM35 Specifications, https://www.ti.com/product/LM35

Similarly do for all other devices required in the project
Moisture Sensor
Humidity Sensor
Pressure Sensor
Motion Sensor
Distance Sensor
Location Sensor
Optical Sensor
Velocity Sensor
Level Sensor
Chemical Sensor

Relay Actuators
Motor drivers
Solenoids
Servo motors
DC motors
Stepper motors

Designing units
Breakdown the project into sub-project or units and design each unit of the project
Identify the interfacing circuits required for each unit and
compute the values for signal conditioning like level shifting, amplification, A/D conversion, etc.

Figure 5.3 Example of interfacing a one unit

e.g.
1. Design of the temperature unit


Figure 5.4 Example of computing the values for the temperature unit


Computing values for LM35
10𝑚𝑉
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 =
𝑑𝑒𝑔𝐶
Therefore, for temperature 200C
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡 = 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑥 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 = 20𝑑𝑒𝑔𝐶 𝑥 10𝑚𝑉
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡 = 200𝑚𝑉
Using 16-bit ADC for converting Analog to digital


5
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝐴𝐷𝐶 = 216
5
=
65536
= 76.29 𝑥 10−6

200 𝑥 10−3
𝐷𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 76.29 𝑥 10−6 = 2621.44 ~ 2621
Computing Temperature value from digital value
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 =  2621 𝑥 76.29 𝑥 10−6 = 0.1999896576 𝑑𝑒𝑔𝐶
𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 =  .200 − 0.1999896576 𝑑𝑒𝑔𝐶 = −0.0000103424
= 10.34 𝑥 10−6𝑑𝑒𝑔𝐶
(Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.)
Similarly do for all other units of the project

Standards
(Discuss and describe the various standards that are relevant and required for the project
Ensure proper citation and referencing.
Standards are technical specifications that ensure interoperability, security, and data exchange between various devices and systems. They cover areas like communication protocols, data formats, security, and device management, allowing devices from different manufacturers to work together seamlessly.
Key aspects of IoT standards are Interoperability, Security, Data Formats and Protocols, Device Management.
Communication Protocols: Standards like Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, ZigBee, MQTT, and CoAP.
Data Formats: Standards like JSON, XML, and CBOR are used for exchanging data between devices and platforms.
Security: Standards such as TLS for secure communication and standards related to data privacy and device security.
Architecture and Interoperability: Standards related to layered architectures or specific device interactions.
Benefits of using IoT standards are
Reduced Development Costs: Standards streamline development by providing a common framework and reducing the need for custom solutions.
Improved Interoperability: Standards enable devices from different manufacturers to work together, creating a more flexible and dynamic IoT ecosystem.
Enhanced Security: Standards provide guidance on security best practices, helping to mitigate risks and protect sensitive data.
Increased Innovation: By providing a foundation for interoperability and security, standards enable innovation and the development of new IoT applications.
e.g.
IEEE develops standards for various aspects of IoT, including Wireless communication (802.11, 802.15),
smart grids (1547), and intelligent transportation (1609)

Key ISO standards for IoT devices include
Frameworks ISO/IEC 30141 (IoT Reference Architecture),
Secure design ISO/IEC 27400 and ISO/IEC 27402 (IoT Security & Privacy), and Testing ISO/IEC 21823 series (Interoperability).

ITU: The ITU (International Telecommunication Union) focuses on establishing a global infrastructure for the IoT, ensuring interoperability and advanced services.

DDS (Data Distribution Service): A scalable IoT protocol for real-time and embedded systems, offering interoperable data exchange.
GS1: GS1 provides standards for identifying objects and capturing data, crucial for the IoT ecosystem.
Key ISO standards for IT include
ISO/IEC 27001 for information security management, ISO 9001 for quality management, and
ISO 20000 for IT service management.

Other relevant standards helping organizations manage risks, improve efficiency, and ensure compliance in a complex IT landscape cover
business continuity (ISO 22301), data privacy (ISO 27701), and
Artificial Intelligence management (ISO/IEC 42001)

communication standards – PCI, UART, I2C, SPI, CAN, etc. MQTT, CoAP, OPC UA: These are popular communication protocols used in IoT for different purposes.
Other standards like Power supply standards, interfacing standards, etc.)
Mapping with IoTWF reference model layers (in tabular form)
(The IoT World Forum offers a clean, simplified perspective on IoT and includes edge computing, data storage, and access.
It provides a clear way of visualizing IoT from a technical perspective.
Each of the seven layers is broken down into specific functions, and security encompasses the entire model.
Using this reference model, we are able to achieve the following:
Decompose the IoT problem into smaller parts
Identify different technologies at each layer and how they relate to one another
Define a system in which different parts can be provided by different vendors
Have a process of defining interfaces that leads to interoperability
Define a tiered security model that enforced at the transition points between levels)

















Figure 5.5 The IoT World Forum Reference Model Table 5.4 Mapping Project layers with IoTWFRM

Layer
IoT World Forum Reference Model
Project Layer mapping (Identify different technologies at each layer and how they relate.
Have a process of
defining interfaces)
Security
(Tiered security model that enforced at the transition points between levels)
7
Collaboration and Processes
(involving people and business processes)


6
Application
(reporting, analytics, control)


5
Data Abstraction
(aggregation and access)


4
Data Accumulation
(Storage)


3
Edge Computing
(data element analysis and transformation


2
Connectivity
(communication and processing units)


1
Physical devices and Controllers
(things)



Domain model specification
(The domain model describes the main concepts, entities and objects in the domain of the IoT system to be designed.
Domain model defines the attributes of the objects and relationships between objects.
The domain model is independent of any specific technology or platform
It consist of physical entities, virtual entities, devices, resources, services as defined in table below
Table 5.5 Description of Domain model

Physical Entity
The physical identifiable objects in the environment
IoT system provides information about the physical entity (using sensors) or performs actuation upon the physical entity
Virtual Entity
Virtual entity is a representation of the physical entity in the digital world
For every physical entity there is a virtual entity

Device
Devices provide a medium for interaction between physical and virtual entities
Devices are used to gather information from or perform actuation on physical entities


Resource
Resources are software components which can be either on-device or network- resources
On-device resources are hosted on the device and provide sensing or actuation (eg: operating system)
Network-resources include software components that are available on the network (eg: database)
Service
Services provide an interface for interacting with the physical entity
Services access resources to perform operations on physical entities
)
e.g.


Figure 5.6 Domain model for Home automation
(Describe the domain model specification and describe the suitability for the project)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.
Communication model
(Based on the requirements choose the Communication model and describe the suitability for the project
The applicable communication model for the project
Request-response model
Publish-subscribe model
Push-pull model
Exclusive pair model)
e.g.

Request-Response communication model

Figure 5.7 Communication model suitable for Home automation

(Describe the Communication model and describe the suitability for the project)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.


IoT deployment level
(Based on the requirements choose the IoT application deployment level and describe the suitability for the project
The applicable IoT deployment level for the project
IoT deployment Level 1
IoT deployment Level 2
IoT deployment Level 3
IoT deployment Level 4
IoT deployment Level 5
IoT deployment Level 6)
e.g.


Figure 5.8 IoT deployment level suitable for Home automation

(Describe the IoT deployment level and describe the suitability for the project)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.


Functional view
(The functional view defines the functions of the IoT systems grouped into various functional groups. Decompose the project and describe it through the functional view
Each functional group provides functionalities for interacting with concepts in the domain model and information related to the concepts.
The functional groups in a functional view include: Device, Communication, Services, Management, Security, and Application.)




Figure 5.9 Functional view for Home automation
(Describe the functional view and describe the suitability for the project)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.


Mapping deployment level with functional blocks
(The mapping between the IoT level and the functional groups as suitable for the project. Describe the mapping)
e.g.


Figure 5.10 mapping IoT deployment level with functional view
(Describe the mapping between the IoT level and the functional view and describe the suitability for the project)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.


Operational view
(define communication options, service hosting options, storage options, device options, various options related to the IoT system deployment and operation are defined, such as:
Service hosting options
Storage options
Device options
Application hosting options)
e.g.

Figure 5.11 Operational view
(Describe the operational view and describe the suitability for the project)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw block diagrams.



Figure 5.12 another Example of operational view


Other Design aspects
Process specification
Information model specification
Service specification
Etc.

Chapter 6
Hardware, Software and Simulation

Hardware
(include
The circuit diagram and description of each sub-project or functional unit.
The integration and description of sub-project or functional unit to realize complete project.
The description of hardware tools required and their configuration process for development of hardware.
Ensure proper citation and referencing.
NOTE: DO NOT insert images and description of hardware components
e.g.
Hardware development tools for legacy MCUs.
Debugger and Programmer tools. Debugging and programming tools and accessories.
Reference Designs. Application-specific designs showcasing complete system solutions
Explorer Kits. Low-cost exploratory kits - to get you started.
Starter Kits. Modular kits for software development and feature evaluation of IoT devices.
Radio Boards. Wireless starter kit plug-in boards featuring specific SoC or module wireless devices.
Expansion boards. Starter kit and ecosystem accessory boards
Evaluation Kits. Product and feature evaluation kits
Development Kits. Full- featured application development kits
Pro Kits. Modular kits for software development and feature evaluation of IoT devices.
Thunderboards. Low-cost software development and prototyping kit for IoT devices)

Software development tools
(include the software programs and platforms tools that help streamline the software development lifecycle by automating tasks, improving collaboration, and ensuring code quality.
Software used to create, manage, test, and deploy applications, including IDEs, version control systems, project management software, and deployment tools.
Describe the configuration procedure of each tool as per the project requirement.
Ensure proper citation and referencing.

NOTE: DO NOT insert images, logo and description of software
e.g.
Key Categories of Software Development Tools
Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) / Code Editors:
These tools provide a comprehensive environment for writing, editing, and debugging code. Examples: Visual Studio Code, IntelliJ IDEA, Eclipse
Version Control Systems (VCS):
Used for tracking changes in code and facilitating collaboration among developers. Examples: Git, GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket
Project Management Tools:
Help teams organize tasks, manage workflows, and track project progress. Examples: Jira, ClickUp, Trello
Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) Tools: Automate the process of building, testing, and deploying software. Examples: Jenkins, GitHub Actions
Containerization Tools:
Enable developers to package applications and their dependencies into portable containers. Examples: Docker
Cloud Platforms:
Provide cloud services and infrastructure for developing, deploying, and managing applications.
Examples: Microsoft Azure, Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud
Collaboration Tools:
Facilitate communication and discussion within development teams. Examples: Slack
API Testing Tools:
Used for designing and testing Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). Examples: Postman
Testing Frameworks:
Tools for automating the testing of software applications to ensure quality and identify errors. Examples: Selenium)

Software code
(include the flowchart, algorithm, code,
Include flowchart, algorithm and description
Describe the function of blocks of code,
Comment each line of code
Ensure proper citation and referencing.)
e.g.
The software for temperature unit is as follows
The temperature sensor and standard libraries are included and variables are initialised #include <stdio.h>
#include <dht.h>

float temp;
int tempPin = 0;
float tempCelsius = 25.0; float tempFahrenheit = 77.0;

Two function to convert Celsius to Fahrenheit and vice versa are
// Function to convert Celsius to Fahrenheit float celsiusToFahrenheit(float celsius) {
return (celsius * 9.0 / 5.0) + 32.0;
}

// Function to convert Fahrenheit to Celsius float fahrenheitToCelsius(float fahrenheit) {
return (fahrenheit - 32.0) * 5.0 / 9.0;
}

The program initialise the variables and call the conversion functions to process the input values and display the results.

// Initilaise the serial monitor void setup() {
Serial.begin(9600);
}

// Continuously monitor the temperature sensor and out the value void loop() {
temp = analogRead(tempPin);

// read analog volt from sensor and save to variable temp temp = temp * 0.48828125;
// convert the analog volt to its temperature equivalent Serial.print("TEMPERATURE = "); Serial.print(temp); // display temperature value Serial.print("*C");
Serial.println();
delay(1000); // update sensor reading each one second Serial .print("Temperature Conversions:\n");
// Celsius conversions
Serial.println("%.2f Celsius is %.2f Fahrenheit.\n", tempCelsius, celsiusToFahrenheit(tempCelsius));

// Fahrenheit conversions
Serial.println("%.2f Fahrenheit is %.2f Celsius.\n", tempFahrenheit, fahrenheitToCelsius(tempFahrenheit));

}

Similarly describe codes of other units and integration of the units.
Simulation
Simulation allows for the virtual testing of electronic circuits, microcontrollers, and complex systems, enabling developers to predict behavior, test designs, and optimize performance without physical hardware
Simulators can be used depending on project
Circuit Simulators: Tools like LTSpice and TINA-TI provide detailed analysis of analog and digital circuits, allowing users to test component behavior and circuit performance before building prototypes.
Microcontroller (MCU) Simulators: Software like Proteus VSM, Oshonsoft, and WOKWI simulate the operation of microcontrollers such as Arduino, PIC, and AVR, enabling the testing of microcontroller code.
Full-System Simulators: Intel Simics is a comprehensive platform for simulating complex hardware systems, facilitating development and debugging of software for these systems.
Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) Simulators: These systems (often supported by platforms like MATLAB/Simulink) test a controller's real-time response to virtual stimuli, acting as a bridge between software control and physical hardware.
3D Modeling and Simulation Software: Platforms such as Ansys and Fusion 360 combine design capabilities with powerful simulation tools to analyze physics-based problems like structural integrity, fluid dynamics, and thermal behavior.
Popular Software Examples

LTSpice: A free circuit simulator from Analog Devices, widely used for analog and power electronics, offering accurate simulations and a vast component library.
TinkerCAD Circuits: A free, web-based platform from Autodesk that is excellent for learning and simulating basic electronics and Arduino projects.
Proteus VSM: A versatile simulator for microcontrollers, supporting various architectures like PIC, AVR, and Arduino.
Ansys: A comprehensive suite for advanced engineering simulation, covering fields like structural analysis, computational fluid dynamics (CFD), and more.
Intel® Simics®: A full-system simulator that allows developers to access and test complex electronic systems without needing the physical hardware.
MATLAB/Simulink: Provides tools for modeling and simulation, with capabilities for Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) testing and integrating with physical systems.

Some Free Circuit Design Software
CircuitMaker
Open Circuit Design Software
KiCad EDA
ADS Circuit Design Software
nagaEDA Circuit Design Software
OpenSce Circuit Design Software
QSapecNG Circuit Design Software
SimulIde
gerbv




Test points
Identifying test points
Chapter 7
Evaluation and Results

Highlight the test points in each functional unit and determine various scenarios. (trouble shooting)
Different test points should be marked for hardware and software to check functionality.
Determine the list of measurement (values, type of signals, etc.) at each test point.
Each design test value should be compared with expected value, simulation and hardware for every functional unit.)
Use open source tools viz. Draw.io, Dia, or any other to draw circuits diagrams.
e.g.
The test points are marked as V1, V2, V3, V4 and V5 for checking the required voltage levels at each of the point in functional unit automatic switching.

Figure 7.1 Power supply unit indicating the test points
Figure 7.1 Testing points for the automatic switching. …..
Example of test scenarios for a project related to solar panels
First scenario or test plan should test the output with various considerations. Test the output of the solar panel at different levels and calculate the potentiometer adjustment theoretically.
Second scenario or test plan 2 in this stage calculates the voltages for the interfaces connected.
Test point 3 or scenario 3…

Test plan
Develop test plan Develop the test plan for each functional unit.
The test plan should be in the form
<Subject> <verb> <Object> <conditions> <values> <range> <constraints>
Develop the test cases for measuring various system characteristics and performance such as accuracy, linearity, latency, power aware etc.
Black box testing (positive, negative, boundary)
White box testing (Control flow, Data flow, Branch, Path)
Hardware testing
Unit Testing
Integrated testing
Software testing
System testing
Validation (dynamic, testing user requirements)
e.g.
TP1: The voltage must be 3.25V when the input is varied between 4 to 6V. TP2: Measure output voltage of temperature sensor for range of temperature
TP3: Measure the output voltage of the IR sensor for detecting object and distance.
TP4: for various input value at ADC pin of microcontroller display the value in serial terminal.
Tp5: for each value of ADC pin of microcontroller compute the Temperature and display the temperature in serial terminal.
TP6: Send initialization commands LCD and test it turn ON TP7: Send char in serial port to WiFi and check output.


Test Result
Tabulating test results.
(For all the test case scenarios listed with respect to design, simulation and implementation aspects.
Measure the sensed values for a range, represent data in tabular form, visualize using graphs, and describe the interpretations
Measurement of various system characteristics and performance such as resolution, efficiency, errors, accuracy, linearity, latency, power aware etc. also
should be tabulated with detailed description.)

Table 7.1 Observations of the Temperature unit
Observations:
Table 7.2 include Observations for each unit

Input
Computed value
Simulated
value
Analog value
Digital value





















Reflect on observations. e.g.
Referring to the table 7.1 it observed that the simulation values are very close to the actual values which reflect the proper functioning of real prototype to meet the objectives. The error is less than 10% and the accuracy of the output is within 90%
Visualise the results with appropriate graphs and describe the insights.
e.g.

Figure 7.2 Variability and trends of precipitation across seasonal cycle of Karnataka region

Figure 7.2 shows the variability and trends of precipitation across seasonal cycle of Karnataka region for the period 1951-2020 to observe the change in precipitation of each month over the years. Precipitation is usually high in the monsoon month of July and low in the non-monsoon month of December, being highest during period 1951-1960 and lowest in the period 2001- 2010. Comparing the average trend values of the latest decade 1991-2020 with earlier decades, the precipitation values are lower in recent decades compared to earlier years indicating climatology trend of precipitation decrease over the years.

Figure 7.3: Distribution of Average mean surface air temperature of Karnataka region.
Figure 7.3 shows change in distribution of average mean surface air temperature of Karnataka region for three periods 1951- 1980, 1971-2000 and 1991-2020. It is observed the peaks have shifted 24.50C, 25.150C and 25.60C respectively indicating increase 1.10C in temperature value compared to the previous period. Moreover, the shift does not only signify increase in the peak but also the range of temperatures in later periods. The distribution suggests that the higher temperature event is more often than before.

Figure 7.4: Trend line of Precipitation per decade of Karnataka region.
Figure 7.4 shows the Trend line of the Precipitation per decade of Karnataka region. The annual average mean precipitation values have gradually fluctuated over the period of 1951-2020.

Although the recent years 1971-2020, 1981-2020 and 1991-2020 shows an increasing precipitation, there is a decreasing trend compared to the previous period of 1951-2020 and 1961-2020. The trend line 2001 to 2040, is directed downward predicting a decrease in the precipitation.
Other examples of graph

Figure 7.5: Urban population and rate of growth of urban population [1].

Figure 7.6: Data explorer view of correct and incorrect predictions.

(a) Type of garden owned.(b) Watering frequency of plants. Figure 7.7: Garden owned and frequency of watering plants

Provided insights for each figure, graph, table

Insights
Discuss insights. Give reasons for the problem
e.g.
What was the reason for the component getting burnt?
What are the conditions under which some components do not work?
Discuss the evaluation in terms of working principle, signal conditioning, latency, linearity, resolution, efficiency, error, accuracy etc.
e.g.
The regulator provides current 1.3A which is close to the maximum rating and gets heated. To avoid exceeding ratings the current may be driven using regulator of higher rating, using heat sink to avoid burning, or multiple regulators to distribute currents to different devices.
The microcontroller requires 200ms to return from sleep state but the delay does not affect the measurement as temperature variation is slower.
As per datasheet the minimum voltage the 10 bit ADC of the microcontroller can measure is 4.89mV and lower values cannot be measured with precision. A high precision ADC would be required for measuring smaller values.
The maximum output voltage of solar panels is 18V that can damage the input to microcontroller and requires interfacing circuits to shift level below 5V to avoid damage to microcontroller.
The measurement of distance by ultrasonic sensor is 34cm whereas the actual value is 31cm which is within 10% accuracy. Ultrasonic sensors are affected by oil, humidity and heat, thus affecting the readings and their instability.
The current sourced by microcontroller digital pin is 40mA and DC current between Vcc and Ground is 200mA. It cannot be used to drive the relay that requires 100mA current and so relay drivers ULN2003 are required. It cannot drive the DC motor and L298N is used
The accuracy between the design, simulation and implementation values is within 10% Although the error is 2% in measurement of time it is not cumulative and remains constant for all values.
Discuss the aspects to improve each functional units in terms of reliability, power aware, interrupt driven, precise timing, meeting standards, safety etc.
e.g.
The switch allows system configuration in OFF mode and normal operation in ON mode.
Interrupt driven programming is used. The microcontroller is programmed to sleep state. When an event occurs an interrupt is generated to wake the system. The measurement and processing is completed and once again the system is put to sleep

mode. The power in wake mode is 6.5mW and 2uW in sleep mode, thereby saving power. The event occurs every 500ms but It takes 100ms to wake, so no value is lost.
The standard frequency 2.4GHz is the used for communication
The freewheeling diode is connected across the relay coil to avoid damage to circuit.
The system has a power switch and reset switch to provide safety and power saving when not in use.
One possible solution is to change the ultrasonic sensor with the waterproof ultrasonic sensor.

Chapter 8
Social, Legal, Ethical, Sustainability and Safety aspects

The actions that society finds acceptable versus the actions which society do not accept. Unfortunately, not all situations are morally well defined.
Who is responsible for assuring the safe, legal, and ethical use of this project?
What are the consequences of dishonesty in system/project use, individual and professional?
How does ethical analysis apply to activities that are against the law?
Ensure proper citation and referencing.


Social Aspects
Social aspects address how a technology or product affects society, including human interactions, communities, and culture.
Ensure proper citation and referencing.
e.g. impact of AI
Positive impacts: Enhanced communication through social media and messaging, improved healthcare with advancements like telemedicine, and broader access to information and education via online platforms.
Negative impacts: The digital divide, which exacerbates inequality by leaving those without access to technology behind. Social media can also contribute to social isolation, mental health issues, and cyberbullying.
Case study: AI: The social impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) includes changes to the workforce due to automation, the potential for algorithmic bias to reinforce societal inequalities, and challenges to human dignity if AI replaces roles that require empathy, such as caregiving or counseling.
Legal Aspects
Legal aspects concern regulations and compliance, with a strong focus on data privacy in the digital age.
Ensure proper citation and referencing.
e.g. impact of AI
Data privacy laws: Landmark legislation such as the EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and India's Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDPA) of 2023 establish frameworks for handling personal data. Key principles include lawful and fair processing, purpose limitation, data minimization, and accountability.

Rights and obligations: Under such laws, individuals have rights to access, correct, and erase their personal data. Data fiduciaries (those who process data) are obligated to obtain consent, implement security safeguards, and manage grievances.
Challenges: Regulatory compliance is complex for multinational companies. For technologies like autonomous vehicles, determining liability in the event of an accident presents a new legal challenge.
Ethical Aspects
Ethical aspects involve moral principles guiding the development and use of technology, considering fairness, accountability, and potential harm.
Ethical action on the part of engineer can be partially simplified, as the simple mandate that an engineer's greatest responsibility is to the public good.
What effects have your project had on the quality of life in the workplace, and in society in general?
Are your projects addictive?
Do they depersonalize the individual to the point that ethical issues no longer seem relevant?
How do electronics engineering professionals determine ethical standards to deal with the effects that their work has in these areas?
Ensure proper citation and referencing.
e.g. impact of AI
AI ethics: This field addresses issues like algorithmic bias and fairness, which can arise when AI is trained on skewed data, leading to biased outcomes in areas like hiring or criminal justice. Other key concerns include transparency (the "black box" problem), data privacy, and accountability.
Robotics: Ethical questions also surround robot rights, the use of AI in lethal autonomous weapons, and how to program morally sound decision-making into autonomous systems.
Generative AI: Ethical debates also encompass copyright and intellectual property, as generative AI models are trained on existing human-created content.
Sustainability Aspects
Sustainability aspects relate to the environmental impact of a product or process, especially throughout its lifecycle.
Sustainable design is a kind of design meant to yield products that are made only of renewable resources. Furthermore, products made, though sustainable design is intended not to seriously impact the environment either when they are being created or when they are being used. These products are also often designed to allow the users to feel more connected or to relate more closely to the natural environment. This design is based on economic, ecological, and social principles regarding the importance of sustainability.
Discuss the relevant sustainability aspects of your project by answering some of the principles (but not restricted to these principles only) of sustainable design as follow:

Efficient use of raw materials (e.g. lightweight and regenerative materials and reduction of waste)
Resource efficient design (e.g. by optimization of energy and water consumption or using less virgin materials)
Durable design (e.g. stable and high durability of the product)
High disposability (e.g. use of easily degradable materials)
Efficient logistics (e.g. minimized packing and efficient transports)
Consumer health & safety (e.g. informing the consumer via product labels and voluntary information
Ensure proper citation and referencing.)
e.g. impact of AI
Supply chain sustainability: Businesses are increasingly focused on creating sustainable supply chains by adopting ethical sourcing, using renewable energy, and managing waste. Measures include reducing emissions from transportation, designing products for recyclability, and establishing transparency with suppliers.
Environmental considerations: The goal is to minimize environmental harm, including protecting natural resources and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Technologies like AI and advanced analytics are being used to optimize supply chains and promote circular economy principles.
Social dimension of sustainability: A sustainable approach also incorporates social responsibility, ensuring fair labor practices and safe working conditions throughout the supply chain.
Safety Aspects
Safety aspects focus on preventing harm and ensuring the security and reliability of products and systems.
(Discuss and describe the safety aspect from the perspective of the project
Ensure proper citation and referencing.
e.g.
The Internet of Things (IoT) in Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) refers to the application of connected physical devices, sensors, and network technology to optimize and enhance processes related to occupational health, workplace safety, and environmental management. This integration enables real-time data collection, facilitating informed decision-making and promoting safer and more sustainable practices.
IoT safety is the process of protecting IoT devices, networks, and data from threats by using best practices like strong, unique passwords and multi-factor authentication, regular firmware updates, data encryption, creating isolated networks for IoT devices, and monitoring for suspicious activity.
IoT also improves safety by enabling real-time monitoring of environmental hazards, providing data-driven insights for risk prevention, and improving emergency response through alerts and guided evacuations.)

e.g. impact of AI
Autonomous vehicles: Safety is paramount for self-driving cars, requiring robust sensor suites, extensive software testing, and cybersecurity measures to prevent hacking.
Redundancy and fail-safe mechanisms are built in to ensure functional safety.
AI systems: Safety guidelines are also crucial for AI, including developing systems that are robust and reliable under various conditions and implementing continuous monitoring. The goal is to prevent AI from producing harmful or unintended outputs.
Cybersecurity: This is a key component of safety, particularly in technology. It involves protecting systems from cyberattacks, data breaches, and unauthorized access.

Chapter 9
Conclusion
(Summarise the approach used in the project, the results obtained and future work)
Discuss how the implementation of this project meets the objectives listed in the Introduction.
Summarize the results and link it with the objectives of the project
Future recommendation - Reflect on design aspects that can be improved but not implemented in your project.)
e.g.
Solar tracking systems designed in the proposed work fulfills the optimized structure in different scenarios based on sunlight. The designed prototype is IoT based to monitor and control the system and also serves as an efficient and a sustainable solar tracking device…….
In the future, this project can be developed and improved to make it more efficient and usable by......

References
(When you write a research paper or report, including a list of references is an important step. Below are some guidelines for selecting and formatting your references.
Include references of all sources used in chapters – 1. Introduction, 2. Literature review, 3. Methodology, 4. Project management, 5. Analysis and Design, 6. Hardware and Software implementation, 7. Evaluation and results, and 8. Social, Legal, Ethical, Sustainability and Safety aspects.
Reference Selection
Make sure all references are directly relevant to the topic/project.
You should cite recent conference and journal papers, preferably those published within the last three to five years.
If you include any figures or tables from other sources, they must be properly cited as well.
Citation and Formatting
Every source you cite in the body of the report must appear in your reference list,
Every source in your reference list must be cited in the text.
If you cite a source multiple times, you only need to include one entry for it in your reference list.
Finally, do not include any references in your list that you haven't cited in your paper.
Use Havard style – e.g. author name, year, title of paper, conference or publication, vol, issue, page no, ISBN no …
e.g.
United Nations, Sustainable Development Goals, Department of Economic and Social Affairs UN, https://sdgs.un.org/goals
NarasimhaRao, Y., Chandra, P.S., Revathi, V. and Kumar, N.S., 2020. Providing enhanced security in IoT based smart weather system. Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 18(1), pp.9-15.
Raju, M.P. and Laxmi, A.J., 2020. IOT based online load forecasting using machine learning algorithms. Procedia Computer Science, 171, pp.551-560.
….
Do not summarise from websites, wikipedia, blogs, etc.)


Use the instructions below to format your references to match the example in the "References" section above.

Step 1. Visit https://scholar.google.com/
Step 2. Search the title of the publication. (screenshot below)


Step 3. Click on “Cite “ link below the searched publication. It will automatically generate the citation in standard formats (screenshot below)

Step 4. Choose the Harvard style and copy-paste in reference

Appendix
(Include summary of specifications of components from datasheet, and a few images of the project demonstrating different scenarios)
Data sheets –
Publications – Acceptance letter, Scopus URL, Certificate.
Few images of project –
Any auxiliary documents –
Datasets
Etc.

Checklist
Students to print checklist separately.
Confirming the checklist is only for ensuring completeness, correctness and quality of report. Use the checklist to confirm all aspects are fulfilled.
Confirming the checklist does not assure full marks. In addition to report, marks are awarded for other aspects of the project viz. implementation and presentation.
Do not include this checklist in the report.
Confirm Formatting – line spacing, paragraph justification, font size.
Confirm Text – details, spellings, grammar
Confirm Figures and Tables - in-text citation, description
Confirm Figures and Tables – updated in List of Figures and Tables
Confirm Citation – all sources referred are cited
Confirm References –all sources referred are updated in Reference section
Faculty to mark ‘X’ in columns not confirming

Sl.
No.
Description
A
B
C
D
E
F

Declaration







Acknowledgement







Abstract







Table of content







– confirm Section, sub-sections from all chapters
included.







– confirm Page no. of Section, sub-sections updated







– confirm Page no. are aligned to right







List of Figures







– confirm Caption of Figures from all chapters
included.







– confirm Page no. of figures updated







– confirm Page no. are aligned to right







– confirm Figures are numbered correctly







List of Tables







– confirm Caption of Tables from all chapters
included.







– confirm Page no. of tables updated







– confirm Page no. are aligned to right







– confirm Tables are numbered correctly







Abbreviations







– confirm Abbreviations used in all chapters included







– confirm Abbreviations are in alphabetic order.







– confirm Abbreviations appear only once in list and
are not repeated







Confirm Formatting – line spacing, paragraph justification, font size.
Confirm Text – details, spellings, grammar
Confirm Figures and Tables - in-text citation, description
Confirm Figures and Tables – updated in List of Figures and Tables
Confirm Citation – all sources referred are cited
Confirm References –all sources referred are updated in Reference section
Faculty to mark ‘X’ in columns not confirming

Sl.
No.
Description
A
B
C
D
E
F
1.
Introduction







1.1 Background







1.2 Statistics of project







1.3 Prior existing technologies







1.4 Proposed approach







1.5 Objectives







1.6 SDGs







1.7 Overview of project report






2.
Literature review






3.
Methodology






4.
Project management







4.1 Project timeline







4.2 Risk analysis







4.3 Project budget






5.
Analysis and Design







5.1 Requirements







5.2 Block Diagram







5.3 System Flow Chart







5.4 Choosing devices







5.5 Designing units







5.6 Standards







5.7 Mapping with IoTWF reference model layers







5.8 Domain model specification







5.9 Communication model







5.10 IoT deployment level







5.11 Functional view







5.12 Mapping IoT deployment level with
functional view







5.13 Operational view







5.14 Other Design






6.
Hardware, Software and Simulation







6.1 Hardware







6.2 Software development tools







6.3 Software code







6.4 Simulation







Confirm Formatting – line spacing, paragraph justification, font size.
Confirm Text – details, spellings, grammar
Confirm Figures and Tables - in-text citation, description
Confirm Figures and Tables – updated in List of Figures and Tables
Confirm Citation – all sources referred are cited
Confirm References –all sources referred are updated in Reference section
Faculty to mark ‘X’ in columns not confirming

Sl.
No.
Description
A
B
C
D
E
F
7.
Evaluation and Results







7.1 Test points







7.2 Test plan







7.3 Test result







7.4 Insights






8.
Social, Legal, Ethical, Sustainability and Safety Aspects







8.1 Social aspects







8.2 Legal aspects







8.3 Ethical aspects







8.4 Sustainability aspects







8.5 Safety aspects






9.
Conclusion







References







Appendix






Remarks:Remarks:
Remarks:
Remarks:

Tentative marking scheme

Sl No
CO
Internship/Dissertation/Capstone Project/Major Project - Evaluation Components
Weightage in %
Marks
1
CO1
Phase 01 Presentation:
Synopsis, Objectives, and Methodology
10
20
2
CO2,
CO3
Phase 02 Presentation:
30% to 50% of Work Progress
10
20
3
CO4, CO5,
CO6
Phase 03 Presentation:
Final Report (50%), Presentation (10%), and Viva- voce (10%)
75
150
4
CO6
Project Expo
5
10


Total
100
200

NOTE: The above-mentioned evaluation rubrics will be applicable for Internship, Dissertation, Capstone Project, Major Project, and other project-based courses from 2021-2025 Batch onwards.
Rubrics

Very Poor:
Poor:
Acceptable: 5
Fair: 6
Good: 7
Very Good: 8
Excellent: 9
Outstanding: 10
0 - 2
3 - 4
5 - 6
7 - 8
9 - 10
1
2
3
4
5
Very poor
Poor
Acceptable, Fair
Good, very good
Excellent, outstanding
Very inconsistent
Minimal consistent
Fairly consistent
Mostly consistent
Completely consistent
Too many
mistakes
Many mistakes
Few mistakes
Very few
mistakes
No mistakes




Description
Max
Marks
Marks
obtained
Phase 01
Synopsis, Objectives, and Methodology
Problem Definition/ Novelty
4



Literature Survey
4



System Architecture and Design
4



Presentation
4



Answering ability
4



Total
20

Phase 02
Work Progress
50% Demo and Execution of Project
8



Contribution to the Project
5



Presentation
4



Answering ability
3



Total
20


Phase 03 * (Detailed breakup is shown in table below)
Prototype, Final Report, Presentation, and Viva- voce
100% Demo and Execution of
Project
45



Project Report
75



Presentation
15



Answering ability/Viva
15



Total
150

Project Expo

Demonstration
10



Total
10


* Detailed Marking for Phase 03 - Prototype, Final Report, Presentation, and Viva-voce



RUBRICS
Max
Marks
Marks
obtained
PART A
Content
Abstract/ Synopsis Write-up
5

Report (75
development
Selection of Topic/ Relevance of the
5

marks) and
Prototype
(30 marks)
subject to concerned discipline/
Problem Identification




Objectives and Methodology
5

(45 marks)






Project management
5



SDGs, Social, Legal, Ethical,
5



Sustainability




References
5


Problem
Breadth of Literature Survey
15


oriented
(Papers/Sites/Sources Surveyed)




Documentation/ Systematic Approach
10


exposition (80 marks)





Design
(Detailed design of the project)
30



Prototype
15



(Demonstrating objectives)




Results (with inference, Conclusions,
10



etc.)



Publication
(10 marks)
Published article in Scopus conference or journal
10

PART B

Quality of preparation of presentation
4

Presentation

Communication Skills
3

(15 marks)






Technical knowledge and awareness
4

and Viva-






Individual involvement
4

Voce






Viva-Voce - Questions relating to
15

(15 marks)

fundamentals and concepts




Total marks
150

